---
layout: post
author: Oleg Lavrovsky
title: federal-finances-overall-budget
download: https://opendata.swiss/de/dataset/federal-finances-overall-budget
document: https://www.efv.admin.ch/efv/de/home/finanzberichterstattung/daten/open_gov_data1.html
image: https://www.zentralplus.ch/get_img?ImageWidth=723&ImageHeight=637&ImageId=7536961
tagline: Bundesfinanzen - Gesamthaushalt
tags: [ "finance", "switzerland", "opendata.swiss" ]
date: 2017-10-02
---

This is a review of the **[Overall Budget](https://opendata.swiss/de/dataset/federal-finances-overall-budget)** dataset from the Swiss Federal Finance Administration (FFA / EFV) published on the Open Government Data (OGD) portal  [opendata.swiss](https://opendata.swiss). As described, the data source is about:

> "financial reporting .. published annually in August. It shows the expected receipts and the expenditure planned by the Federal Council for the year ahead. Supplementing the budget, the financial plan gives an overview of the probable trend of receipts and expenditure in the subsequent years. The financial statements are published each year in March. They show the Federal Administration's accounts for the preceding year."

I was glad to see that the dataset is clearly described in all four languages of the portal, and well annotated in the basic metadata. It would be good to see a few more tags used, with words that are not already in the title, to help find the dataset.

Since I would expect that the time range of historical data specifies "measures" rather than "predictions", I would say the stated Temporal Coverage is also somewhat misleading - and cannot explain why there are two entries:

- January 1, 1990 - December 31, 2021
- January 1, 2007 - December 31, 2021

As a general comment, linking to the [legal notice of admin.ch](https://www.admin.ch/gov/de/start/rechtliches.html) as the "Legal basis" of the dataset is not very helpful, as it does not overlap with the terms of use stated on the portal. I cannot really comment on the choice of Terms, though wonder why anybody would *not* want to attribute the source of this kind of data, making the requirement somewhat ambiguous in my mind.

It is however unfortunate that at time of writing the [further information](https://www.efv.admin.ch/efv/de/home/finanzberichterstattung/daten/open_gov_data1.html) page does not have any links back to the OGD portal, avoiding the chance to close the feedback loop.

As explained on that source home page, there is a PDF report as well as two additional complementary datasets which should be taken into account: Bundesbeschlüsse (German) and State financial statements. Some of these are also published on the OGD portal - [receipts and expenditure](https://opendata.swiss/en/dataset/federal-finances-receipts-and-expenditure) and [institutions](https://opendata.swiss/en/dataset/federal-finances-institutions) from FFA are linked in the "Related datasets" section. However, the [State financial statements](https://opendata.swiss/en/dataset/state-financial-statements-federal-budget-receipts-and-expenditure-of-the-confederation-for-the-prev) from the Swiss Federal Archives is not linked, yet looks very similar.

The entire dataset and all data it relates to should be published and documented on the open data portal, with all relevant datasets interlinked and an explanation somewhere for their common schema. If users need to visit the publisher website and spend time trying to understand how it works, and where to find what they need, that puts a serious break on the experience. A high quality standard can be effectively mantained in my opinion only if the entire data catalogue on the portal is consistent, not just individual datasets or sections.

You can download the full data in four languages at [opendata.swiss](https://opendata.swiss/de/dataset/federal-finances-overall-budget). The attached CSV files can be browsed through the Preview links which lead to a [page like this](https://opendata.swiss/en/dataset/federal-finances-overall-budget/resource/a41d66ee-423f-41b3-9720-c66a47e44abc) - embedded below. This nice capability of previewing the data immediately through CKAN is possible since CSV is an open, non-proprietary format, and the files aren't stashed in a ZIP archive.

<iframe src="https://opendata.swiss/de/dataset/federal-finances-overall-budget/resource/a41d66ee-423f-41b3-9720-c66a47e44abc/view/fe8dc636-6061-4766-af87-39dbaa20f342" frameborder="0" width="100%" height="600" data-module="data-viewer"></iframe>

From looking at the data, we see that there are some structural issues. In the preview, we see the *id* column on its own as a series of numbers in no particular order. This seems like a publication error until one downloads and opens the file, then it becomes clear that the title column is missing a header and was excluded from preview. In fact, the *id* column is a mirage, automatically generated by CKAN for the preview.

Here is how the (top left corner of) the data actually looks like:

<table cellspacing="0" border="0">
	<tr>
		<td height="17" align="left"><br></td>
		<td align="left"><br></td>
		<td align="right" sdval="1990" sdnum="2055;">1990</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="1991" sdnum="2055;">1991</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="1992" sdnum="2055;">1992</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td height="17" align="left">Financing statement </td>
		<td align="left"><br></td>
		<td align="left"><br></td>
		<td align="left"><br></td>
		<td align="left"><br></td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td height="17" align="left">Financing statement  &gt; Overall fiscal balance </td>
		<td align="left">CHF</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="1057658360.08" sdnum="2055;">1057658360.08</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="-2011523534.73" sdnum="2055;">-2011523534.73</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="-2863480070.89" sdnum="2055;">-2863480070.89</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td height="17" align="left">Financing statement  &gt; Overall fiscal balance  &gt; Ordinary financing result </td>
		<td align="left">CHF</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="1057658360.08" sdnum="2055;">1057658360.08</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="-2011523534.73" sdnum="2055;">-2011523534.73</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="-2863480070.89" sdnum="2055;">-2863480070.89</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td height="17" align="left">Financing statement  &gt; Overall fiscal balance  &gt; Ordinary financing result  &gt; Ordinary receipts </td>
		<td align="left">CHF</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="32673387167.08" sdnum="2055;">32673387167.08</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="33489848987.45" sdnum="2055;">33489848987.45</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="34953001087.64" sdnum="2055;">34953001087.64</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td height="17" align="left">Financing statement  &gt; Overall fiscal balance  &gt; Ordinary financing result  &gt; Ordinary receipts  &gt; Tax receipts </td>
		<td align="left">CHF</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="28817750335.08" sdnum="2055;">28817750335.08</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="29171676260.37" sdnum="2055;">29171676260.37</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="30408565720.48" sdnum="2055;">30408565720.48</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td height="17" align="left">Financing statement  &gt; Overall fiscal balance  &gt; Ordinary financing result  &gt; Ordinary receipts  &gt; Tax receipts  &gt; Direct federal tax </td>
		<td align="left">CHF</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="6710423171.08" sdnum="2055;">6710423171.08</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="6849349758" sdnum="2055;">6849349758</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="8341693603.01" sdnum="2055;">8341693603.01</td>
	</tr>
	<tr>
		<td height="17" align="left">Financing statement  &gt; Overall fiscal balance  &gt; Ordinary financing result  &gt; Ordinary receipts  &gt; Tax receipts  &gt; Withholding tax </td>
		<td align="left">CHF</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="4044483777" sdnum="2055;">4044483777</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="4103866254" sdnum="2055;">4103866254</td>
		<td align="right" sdval="3973961173" sdnum="2055;">3973961173</td>
	</tr>
</table>

Some rows have inexplicably none, or only one or a few year entries. On row 53 and 92 we see the year numbers repeat due to a merging of several tables into one. One does not expect to see something like this in source data.

Instead, this one table should be broken up into individual ones. And it could be rather helpful if in every dataset the publication process was clearly stipulated - at least to document the steps involved for posterity.

Having no thousands delimiters (x'xxx'xxx..) makes it difficult to quickly look up the numbers in the PDF reports. I also can't explain the triple zero number format (xxxx.000), but suppose that it might be some artifact of the financial software being used. Most critically, the rows all have slightly different formats, i.e. some are monetary amounts, others percentanges or other measures. The lack of a separate "format" column adds insult to the injury of having to deal with a heterogenous dataset. Providing [Table schema](https://specs.frictionlessdata.io/table-schema/) would be an excellent way to mitigate some of this problem, as well alternative formats for the "raw data" (in whatever form it is), and if at all possible free and open source accounting software - granted that most such software is not designed for a national budget.

Due to the issues above the data cannot be used by most people as-is. The preview and visualisation tools built into *opendata.swiss* do not work correctly. When forced to hunt for puzzle pieces of information, and faced with dataset of inherent complexity, most users will probably quickly give up in frustration. If it is not easily accessible to programmers like yours truly, then it will not be easily understood by machine agents. The discrete numbers this dataset contains are much more easily read by humans in the PDF report.

Which begs the question of why such a dataset should be published in the first place.

Financial data is deeply layered, mirrors complex administrational structures, and the specifities of each row are highly relevant. An attempt to import data of this type into [OpenSpending](https://openspending.org) would be valuable to understand [structural issues](https://discuss.okfn.org/t/data-modelling-structure-decisions/5402/3) and get a more complete picture on how accessible and compatible national financial data is with international efforts.

The limited usefulness of the data published in this way, the absence of linkbacks on the publisher's site, and the current lack of community projects in this area all suggest that either the publication of this OGD is not very earnest - or that it is just taking many months to update the website and stimulate some engagement, both unacceptable for data of this kind.

At a fundamental level, fiscal transparency is as an absolutely key goal of the open data movement, one in which Switzerland is behind according to various assessments. It would be worthwhile to have a discussion together with people in the [openness community](http://make.opendata.ch/wiki/tag:finance?do=showtag&tag=finance) who are interested in the topic of finance data, and look for opportunities to turn this into a win-win situation.

An improved and facilitated access to vital data about the functioning of the state, and engagement from civic partners who use the data to learn all they can. This can only help in the future to spread knowledge about what it represents, and create valuable new public-private feedback loops. I look forward to reviewing the dataset again when its quality is dramatically improved.
